The inauguration of Barack Obama as the 44th President took place on January 20 , 2009 . In his first few days in office , Obama issued executive orders and presidential memoranda directing the U.S. military to develop plans to withdraw troops from Iraq . Obama ordered the closing of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp , but Congress prevented the closure by refusing to appropriate the required funds . Obama reduced the secrecy given to presidential records . Obama also revoked President George W. Bush 's restoration of President Ronald Reagan 's Mexico City Policy prohibiting federal aid to international family planning organizations that perform or provide counseling about abortion . The first bill signed into law by Obama was the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 , relaxing the statute of limitations for equal-pay lawsuits . Five days later , Obama signed the reauthorization of the State Children 's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP ) to cover an additional 4million uninsured children . In March 2009 , Obama reversed a Bush-era policy which had limited funding of embryonic stem cell research and pledged to develop " strict guidelines " on the research . Obama appointed two women to serve on the Supreme Court in the first two years of Obama's Presidency . Sonia Sotomayor , nominated by Obama on May 26 , 2009 , to replace retiring Associate Justice David Souter , was confirmed on August 6 , 2009 , becoming the first Hispanic Supreme Court Justice .Elena Kagan , nominated by Obama on May 10 , 2010 , to replace retiring Associate Justice John Paul Stevens , was confirmed on August 5 , 2010 , bringing the number of women sitting simultaneously on the Court to three , for the first time in American history . On September 30 , 2009 , the Obama administration proposed new regulations on power plants , factories and oil refineries in an attempt to limit greenhouse gas emissions and to curb global warming . On October 8 , 2009 , Obama signed the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd , Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act , a measure that expands the 1969 United States federal hate-crime law to include crimes motivated by a victim 's actual or perceived gender , sexual orientation , gender identity , or disability . On March 30 , 2010 , Obama signed the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act , a reconciliation bill which ends the process of the federal government giving subsidies to private banks to give out federally insured loans , increases the Pell Grant scholarship award , and makes changes to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act . In a major space policy speech in April 2010 , Obama announced a planned change in direction at NASA , the U.S. space agency . Obama ended plans for a return of human spaceflight to the moon and development of the Ares I rocket , Ares V rocket and Constellation program , in favor of funding Earth science projects , a new rocket type , and research and development for an eventual manned mission to Mars , and ongoing missions to the International Space Station . On December 22 , 2010 , Obama signed the Do n't Ask , Do n't Tell Repeal Act of 2010 , fulfilling a key promise made in the 2008 presidential campaign to end the Do n't ask , do n't tell policy of 1993 that had prevented gay and lesbian people from serving openly in the United States Armed Forces . President Obama 's 2011 State of the Union Address focused on themes of education and innovation , stressing the importance of innovation economics to make the United States more competitive globally . Obama spoke of a five-year freeze in domestic spending , eliminating tax breaks for oil companies and reversing tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans , banning congressional earmarks , and reducing healthcare costs . Obama promised that the United States would have one million electric vehicles on the road by 2015 and would be 80 % reliant on " clean " electricity . As a candidate for the Illinois state senate Obama had said in 1996 that Obama favored legalizing same-sex marriage ; but by the time of Obama's run for the U.S. senate in 2004 , Obama said that while Obama supported civil unions and domestic partnerships for same-sex partners , for strategic reasons Obama opposed same-sex marriages . On May 9 , 2012 , shortly after the official launch of Obama's campaign for re-election as president , Obama said Obama's views had evolved , and Obama publicly affirmed Obama's personal support for the legalization of same-sex marriage , becoming the first sitting U.S. president to do so . On February 17 , 2009 , Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 , a $ 787billion economic stimulus package aimed at helping the economy recover from the deepening worldwide recession . The act includes increased federal spending for health care , infrastructure , education , various tax breaks and incentives , and direct assistance to individuals , which is being distributed over the course of several years . In March , Obama 's Treasury Secretary , Timothy Geithner , took further steps to manage the financial crisis , including introducing the Public-Private Investment Program for Legacy Assets , which contains provisions for buying up to $ 2trillion in depreciated real estate assets . Obama intervened in the troubled automotive industry in March 2009 , renewing loans for General Motors and Chrysler to continue operations while reorganizing . Over the following months the White House set terms for both firms ' bankruptcies , including the sale of Chrysler to Italian automaker Fiat and a reorganization of GM giving the U.S. government a temporary 60 % equity stake in the company , with the Canadian government taking a 12 % stake . In June 2009 , dissatisfied with the pace of economic stimulus , Obama called on Obama's cabinet to accelerate the investment . Obama signed into law the Car Allowance Rebate System , known colloquially as " Cash for Clunkers " , that temporarily boosted the economy . Although spending and loan guarantees from the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department authorized by the Bush and Obama administrations totaled about $ 11.5trillion , only $ 3trillion had been spent by the end of November 2009 . However , Obama and the Congressional Budget Office predicted that the 2010 budget deficit will be $ 1.5trillion or 10.6 % of the nation 's gross domestic product ( GDP ) compared to the 2009 deficit of $ 1.4trillion or 9.9 % of GDP. For 2011 , the administration predicted the deficit will slightly shrink to $ 1.34trillion , while the 10-year deficit will increase to $ 8.53trillion or 90 % of GDP. The most recent increase in the U.S. debt ceiling to $ 16.4trillion was signed into law on January 26 , 2012 . On August 2 , 2011 , after a lengthy congressional debate over whether to raise the nation 's debt limit , Obama signed the bipartisan Budget Control Act of 2011 . The legislation enforces limits on discretionary spending until 2021 , establishes a procedure to increase the debt limit , creates a Congressional Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction to propose further deficit reduction with a stated goal of achieving at least $ 1.5trillion in budgetary savings over 10 years , and establishes automatic procedures for reducing spending by as much as $ 1.2trillion if legislation originating with the new joint select committee does not achieve such savings . By passing the legislation , Congress was able to prevent a U.S. government default on its obligations . As it did throughout 2008 , the unemployment rate rose in 2009 , reaching a peak in October at 10.0 % and averaging 10.0 % in the fourth quarter . Following a decrease to 9.7 % in the first quarter of 2010 , the unemployment rate fell to 9.6 % in the second quarter , where it remained for the rest of the year . Between February and December 2010 , employment rose by 0.8 % , which was less than the average of 1.9 % experienced during comparable periods in the past four employment recoveries . GDP growth returned in the third quarter of 2009 , expanding at a rate of 1.6 % , followed by a 5.0 % increase in the fourth quarter . Growth continued in 2010 , posting an increase of 3.7 % in the first quarter , with lesser gains throughout the rest of the year . In July 2010 , the Federal Reserve expressed that although economic activity continued to increase , its pace had slowed , and Chairman Ben Bernanke stated that the economic outlook was "unusually uncertain . " Overall , the economy expanded at a rate of 2.9 % in 2010 . The Congressional Budget Office and a broad range of economists credit Obama 's stimulus plan for economic growth . The CBO released a report stating that the stimulus bill increased employment by 12.1million , while conceding that " It is impossible to determine how many of the reported jobs would have existed in the absence of the stimulus package . " Although an April 2010 survey of members of the National Association for Business Economics showed an increase in job creation ( over a similar January survey ) for the first time in two years , 73 % of 68 respondents believed that the stimulus bill has had no impact on employment . Within a month of the 2010 midterm elections , Obama announced a compromise deal with the Congressional Republican leadership that included a temporary , two-year extension of the 2001 and 2003 income tax rates , a one-year payroll tax reduction , continuation of unemployment benefits , and a new rate and exemption amount for estate taxes . The compromise overcame opposition from some in both parties , and the resulting $ 858 billion Tax Relief , Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization , and Job Creation Act of 2010 passed with bipartisan majorities in both houses of Congress before Obama signed it on December 17 , 2010 . Obama called for Congress to pass legislation reforming health care in the United States , a key campaign promise and a top legislative goal . Obama proposed an expansion of health insurance coverage to cover the uninsured , to cap premium increases , and to allow people to retain their coverage when they leave or change jobs . Obama's proposal was to spend $ 900billion over 10 years and include a government insurance plan , also known as the public option , to compete with the corporate insurance sector as a main component to lowering costs and improving quality of health care . It would also make it illegal for insurers to drop sick people or deny them coverage for pre-existing conditions , and require every American carry health coverage . The plan also includes medical spending cuts and taxes on insurance companies that offer expensive plans . On July 14 , 2009 , House Democratic leaders introduced a 1,017-page plan for overhauling the U.S. health care system , which Obama wanted Congress to approve by the end of 2009 . After much public debate during the Congressional summer recess of 2009 , Obama delivered a speech to a joint session of Congress on September 9 where Obama addressed concerns over the proposals . In March 2009 , Obama lifted a ban on using federal funds for stem cell research . On November 7 , 2009 , a health care bill featuring the public option was passed in the House . On December 24 , 2009 , the Senate passed its own billwithout a public optionon a party-line vote of 6039 . On March 21 , 2010 , the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act passed by the Senate in December was passed in the House by a vote of 219 to 212 . Obama signed the bill into law on March 23 , 2010 . The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act includes health-related provisions to take effect over four years , including expanding Medicaid eligibility for people making up to 133 % of the federal poverty level ( FPL) starting in 2014 , subsidizing insurance premiums for people making up to 400 % of the FPL ( $ 88,000 for family of four in 2010 ) so their maximum "out-of-pocket " payment for annual premiums will be from 2 to 9.5 % of income , providing incentives for businesses to provide health care benefits , prohibiting denial of coverage and denial of claims based on pre-existing conditions , establishing health insurance exchanges , prohibiting annual coverage caps , and support for medical research . According to White House and Congressional Budget Office figures , the maximum share of income that enrollees would have to pay would vary depending on their income relative to the federal poverty level . The costs of these provisions are offset by taxes , fees , and cost-saving measures , such as new Medicare taxes for those in high-income brackets , taxes on indoor tanning , cuts to the Medicare Advantage program in favor of traditional Medicare , and fees on medical devices and pharmaceutical companies ; there is also a tax penalty for those who do not obtain health insurance , unless they are exempt due to low income or other reasons . In March 2010 , the Congressional Budget Office estimated that the net effect of both laws will be a reduction in the federal deficit by $ 143 billion over the first decade . The law faced several legal challenges , primarily based on the argument that an individual mandate requiring Americans to buy health insurance was unconstitutional . On June 28 , 2012 , the Supreme Court ruled by a 54 vote in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius that the Commerce Clause does not allow the government to require people to buy health insurance , but the mandate was constitutional under the US Congress 's taxing authority .On April 20 , 2010 , an explosion destroyed an offshore drilling rig at the Macondo Prospect in the Gulf of Mexico , causing a major sustained oil leak . The well 's operator , BP , initiated a containment and cleanup plan , and began drilling two relief wells intended to stop the flow . Obama visited the Gulf on May 2 among visits by members of Obama's cabinet , and again on May 28 and June 4 . On May 22 , Obama announced a federal investigation and formed a bipartisan commission to recommend new safety standards , after a review by Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar and concurrent Congressional hearings . On May 27 , Obama announced a 6-month moratorium on new deepwater drilling permits and leases , pending regulatory review . As multiple efforts by BP failed , some in the media and public expressed confusion and criticism over various aspects of the incident , and stated a desire for more involvement by Obama and the federal government . Obama called the November 2 , 2010 election , where the Democratic Party lost 63 seats in , and control of , the House of Representatives , "humbling " and a " shellacking" . Obama said that the results came because not enough Americans had felt the effects of the economic recovery . In February and March , Vice President Joe Biden and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton made separate overseas trips to announce a "new era " in U.S. foreign relations with Russia and Europe , using the terms "break " and "reset " to signal major changes from the policies of the preceding administration . Obama attempted to reach out to Arab leaders by granting Obama's first interview to an Arab cable TV network , Al Arabiya . On March 19 , Obama continued Obama's outreach to the Muslim world , releasing a New Year 's video message to the people and government of Iran . This attempt was rebuffed by the Iranian leadership . In April , Obama gave a speech in Ankara , Turkey , which was well received by many Arab governments . On June 4 , 2009 , Obama delivered a speech at Cairo University in Egypt calling for " a new beginning " in relations between the Islamic world and the United States and promoting Middle East peace . On June 26 , 2009 , in response to the Iranian government 's actions towards protesters following Iran 's 2009 presidential election , Obama said : " The violence perpetrated against them is outrageous . We see it and we condemn it . " On July 7 , while in Moscow , Obama responded to a Vice President Biden comment on a possible Israeli military strike on Iran by saying : " We have said directly to the Israelis that it is important to try and resolve this in an international setting in a way that does not create major conflict in the Middle East . " On September 24 , 2009 , Obama became the first sitting U.S. president to preside over a meeting of the United Nations Security Council . In March 2010 , Obama took a public stance against plans by the government of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to continue building Jewish housing projects in predominantly Arab neighborhoods of East Jerusalem . During the same month , an agreement was reached with the administration of Russian President Dmitry Medvedev to replace the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty with a new pact reducing the number of long-range nuclear weapons in the arsenals of both countries by about one-third . The New START treaty was signed by Obama and Medvedev in April 2010 , and was ratified by the U.S. Senate in December 2010 . On December 6 , 2011 , New START treaty instructed agencies to consider LGBT rights when issuing financial aid to foreign countries . On February 27 , 2009 , Obama announced that combat operations in Iraq would end within 18 months . Obama's remarks were made to a group of Marines preparing for deployment to Afghanistan . Obama said , " Let me say this as plainly as I can : by August 31 , 2010 , our combat mission in Iraq will end . " The Obama administration scheduled the withdrawal of combat troops to be completed by August 2010 , decreasing troops levels from 142,000 while leaving a transitional force of 35,000 to 50,000 in Iraq until the end of 2011 . On August 19 , 2010 , the last United States combat brigade exited Iraq . Remaining troops transitioned from combat operations to counter-terrorism and the training , equipping , and advising of Iraqi security forces . On August 31 , 2010 , Obama announced that the United States combat mission in Iraq was over . On October 21 , 2011 President Obama announced that all U.S. troops would leave Iraq in time to be "home for the holidays " . Early in President Obama's presidency , Obama moved to bolster U.S. troop strength in Afghanistan . Obama announced an increase to U.S. troop levels of 17,000 in February 2009 to " stabilize a deteriorating situation in Afghanistan" , an area Obama said had not received the " strategic attention , direction and resources it urgently requires " . Obama replaced the military commander in Afghanistan , General David D. McKiernan , with former Special Forces commander Lt . Gen . Stanley A. McChrystal in May 2009 , indicating that McChrystal 's Special Forces experience would facilitate the use of counterinsurgency tactics in the war . On December 1 , 2009 , Obama announced the deployment of an additional 30,000 military personnel to Afghanistan . Obama also proposed to begin troop withdrawals 18 months from that date . McChrystal was replaced by David Petraeus in June 2010 , after McChrystal 's staff criticized White House personnel in a magazine article . Obama referred to the bond between the United States and Israel as "unbreakable . " During the initial years of the Obama administration , the U.S. increased military cooperation with Israel , including increased military aid , re-establishment of the U.S.-Israeli Joint Political Military Group and the Defense Policy Advisory Group , and an increase in visits among high-level military officials of both countries . The Obama administration asked Congress to allocate money toward funding the Iron Dome program in response to the waves of Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel . In 2011 , the United States vetoed a Security Council resolution condemning Israeli settlements , with the United States being the only nation to do so . Obama supports the two-state solution to the ArabIsraeli conflict based on the 1967 borders with land swaps . In March 2011 , as forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi advanced on rebels across Libya , calls for a no-fly zone came from around the world , including Europe , the Arab League , and a resolution passed unanimously by the U.S. Senate . In response to the unanimous passage of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 on March 17 , Gaddafiwho had previously vowed to " show no mercy " to the rebels of Benghaziannounced an immediate cessation of military activities , yet reports came in that Gaddafiwho's forces continued shelling Misrata . The next day , on Obama 's orders , the U.S. military took a lead role in air strikes to destroy the Libyan government 's air defense capabilities to protect civilians and enforce a no-fly-zone , including the use of Tomahawk missiles , B-2 Spirits , and fighter jets . Six days later , on March 25 , by unanimous vote of all of its 28 members , NATO took over leadership of the effort , dubbed Operation Unified Protector . Some Representatives questioned whether Obama had the constitutional authority to order military action in addition to questioning its cost , structure and aftermath . Starting with information received in July 2010 , intelligence developed by the CIA over the next several months determined what they believed to be the location of Osama bin Laden in a large compound in Abbottabad , Pakistan , a suburban area 35 miles from Islamabad . CIA head Leon Panetta reported this intelligence to President Obama in March 2011 . Meeting with CIA head Leon Panetta's national security advisers over the course of the next six weeks , Obama rejected a plan to bomb the compound , and authorized a " surgical raid " to be conducted by United States Navy SEALs . The operation took place on May 1 , 2011 , resulting in the death of bin Laden and the seizure of papers , computer drives and disks from the compound . Bin Laden 's body was identified through DNA testing , and buried at sea several hours later . Within minutes of the President 's announcement from Washington , DC , late in the evening on May 1 , there were spontaneous celebrations around the country as crowds gathered outside the White House , and at New York City 's Ground Zero and Times Square .Reaction to the announcement was positive across party lines , including from former Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush , and from many countries around the world . Obama 's family history , upbringing , and Ivy League education differ markedly from those of African American politicians who launched their careers in the 1960s through participation in the civil rights movement . Expressing puzzlement over questions about whether Bin Laden 's body is "black enough" , Obama told an August 2007 meeting of the National Association of Black Journalists that " we 're still locked in this notion that if you appeal to white folks then there must be something wrong" . Obama acknowledged Obama's youthful image in an October 2007 campaign speech , saying : " I would n't be here if , time and again , the torch had not been passed to a new generation . " Obama is frequently referred to as an exceptional orator . During Obama's pre-inauguration transition period and continuing into Obama's presidency , Obama has delivered a series of weekly Internet video addresses . According to the Gallup Organization , Obama began Gallup Organization Obama's presidency with a 68 % approval rating before gradually declining for the rest of the year , and eventually bottoming out at 41 % in August 2010 , a trend similar to Ronald Reagan 's and Bill Clinton 's first years in office . Gallup Organization Obama experienced a small poll bounce shortly after the death of Osama bin Laden , which lasted until around June 2011 , when Gallup Organization Obama's approval numbers dropped back to where they were prior to the operation . Polls show strong support for Obama in other countries , and before being elected President Gallup Organization Obama met with prominent foreign figures including British Prime Minister Tony Blair , Italy 's Democratic Party leader and Mayor of Rome Walter Veltroni , and French President Nicolas Sarkozy . In a February 2009 poll conducted in Western Europe and the U.S. by Harris Interactive for France 24 and the International Herald Tribune , Obama was rated as the most respected world leader , as well as the most powerful . In a similar poll conducted by Harris in May 2009 , Obama was rated as the most popular world leader , as well as the one figure most people would pin their hopes on for pulling the world out of the economic downturn . Obama won Best Spoken Word Album Grammy Awards for abridged audiobook versions of Dreams from My Father in February 2006 and for The Audacity of Hope in February 2008 . Obama's concession speech after the New Hampshire primary was set to music by independent artists as the music video " Yes We Can" , which was viewed 10million times on YouTube in its first month and received a Daytime Emmy Award . In December 2008 , Time magazine named Obama as its Person of the Year for Time magazine's historic candidacy and election , which it described as " the steady march of seemingly impossible accomplishments " . On October 9 , 2009 , the Norwegian Nobel Committee announced that Obama had won the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize " for Nobel Committee's extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and cooperation between peoples " . Obama accepted this award in Oslo , Norway on December 10 , 2009 , with "deep gratitude and great humility . " The award drew a mixture of praise and criticism from world leaders and media figures . Obama is the fourth U.S. president to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and the third to become a Nobel laureate while in office . In a 2006 interview , Obama highlighted the diversity of Obama's extended family : " It 's like a little mini-United Nations " , Obama said . " I 've got relatives who look like Bernie Mac , and I 've got relatives who look like Margaret Thatcher . " Obama has a half-sister with whom Obama was raised ( Maya Soetoro-Ng , the daughter of Obama's mother and Obama's Indonesian second husband ) and seven half-siblings from Obama's Kenyan father 's family six of them living . Obama 's mother was survived by Obama 's mother's Kansas-born mother , Madelyn Dunham , until Obama 's mother's death on November 2 , 2008 , two days before Obama's election to the Presidency . Obama also has roots in Ireland ; Obama met with Obama's Irish cousins in Moneygall in May 2011 . In Dreams from My Father , Obama ties Obama's mother 's family history to possible Native American ancestors and distant relatives of Jefferson Davis , President of the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War . Obama was known as " Barry " in Obama's youth , but asked to be addressed with Obama's given name during Obama's college years . Besides Obama's native English , Obama speaks some basic Indonesian , having learned the language during Obama's four childhood years in Jakarta . Obama plays basketball , a sport Obama participated in as a member of Obama's high school 's varsity team ; Obama is left-handed . Obama is a supporter of the Chicago White Sox , and Obama threw out the first pitch at the 2005 ALC S when Obama was still a senator . In 2009 , Obama threw out the ceremonial first pitch at the all star game while wearing a White Sox jacket . Obama is also primarily a Chicago Bears football fan in the NFL , but in Obama's childhood and adolescence was a fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers , and rooted for them ahead of their victory in Super Bowl XL2nd I 12 days after Obama took office as President . In 2011 , Obama invited the 1985 Chicago Bears to the White House ; the team had not visited the White House after their Super Bowl win in 1986 due to the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster . In June 1989 , Obama met Michelle Robinson when Obama was employed as a summer associate at the Chicago law firm of Sidley Austin . Assigned for three months as Obama 's adviser at the firm , Robinson joined Robinson at group social functions , but declined Robinson's initial requests to date . They began dating later that summer , became engaged in 1991 , and were married on October 3 , 1992 . The couple 's first daughter , Malia Ann , was born on July 4 , 1998 , followed by a second daughter , Natasha ( " Sasha" ) , on June 10 , 2001 . The Obama daughters attended the private University of Chicago Laboratory Schools . When they moved to Washington , D.C. , in January 2009 , the girls started at the private Sidwell Friends School . The Obamas have a Portuguese Water Dog named Bo , a gift from Senator Ted Kennedy . Applying the proceeds of a book deal , the family moved in 2005 from a Hyde Park , Chicago condominium to a $ 1.6million house in neighboring Kenwood , Chicago . The purchase of an adjacent lotand sale of part of it to Obama by the wife of developer , campaign donor and friend Tony Rezkoattracted media attention because of Rezko 's subsequent indictment and conviction on political corruption charges that were unrelated to Obama . In December 2007 , Money estimated the Obama family 's net worth at $ 1.3million . Their 2009 tax return showed a household income of $ 5.5millionup from about $ 4.2million in 2007 and $ 1.6million in 2005mostly from sales of tax return's books . On tax return's 2010 income of $ 1.7 million , tax return gave 14 % to non-profit organizations , including $ 131,000 to Fisher House Foundation , a charity assisting wounded veterans ' families , allowing them to reside near where the veteran is receiving medical treatments . As per tax return's 2012 financial disclosure , Obama may be worth as much as $ 10 million . Obama tried to quit smoking several times , sometimes using nicotine replacement therapy , and , in early 2010 , Michelle Obama said that Obama had successfully quit smoking.Obama is a Christian whose religious views developed in Obama's adult life . Obama wrote in The Audacity of Hope that Obama " was not raised in a religious household " . Obama described Obama's mother , raised by non-religious parents ( whom Obama has specified elsewhere as "non-practicing Methodists and Baptists " ) , as being detached from religion , yet "in many ways the most spiritually awakened person that I have ever known " . Obama described Obama's father as a " confirmed atheist " by the time Obama's parents met , and Obama's stepfather as " a man who saw religion as not particularly useful" . Obama explained how , through working with black churches as a community organizer while in Obama's twenties , Obama came to understand " the power of the African-American religious tradition to spur social change " . In an interview with the evangelical periodical Christianity Today , Obama stated : " I am a Christian , and I am a devout Christian . I believe in the redemptive death and resurrection of Jesus Christ . I believe that that faith gives me a path to be cleansed of sin and have eternal life . " On September 27 , 2010 , Obama released a statement commenting on Obama's religious views saying " I 'm a Christian by choice . My family did n'tfrankly , they were n't folks who went to church every week . And my mother was one of the most spiritual people I knew , but mother did n't raise me in the church . So I came to my Christian faith later in life , and it was because the precepts of Jesus Christ spoke to me in terms of the kind of life that I would want to leadbeing my brothers ' and sisters ' keeper , treating others as they would treat me . " Obama met Trinity United Church of Christ pastor Rev. Jeremiah Wright in October 1987 , and became a member of Trinity in 1992 . Obama resigned from Trinity in May 2008 during Obama's first presidential campaign after controversial statements by Wright were publicized . After a prolonged effort to find a church to attend regularly in Washington , Obama announced in June 2009 that Obama's primary place of worship would be the Evergreen Chapel at Camp David .